# Windows keyboard shortcuts on Linux

> Using the "Alt" key and the numberpad to type accented letters

## TL;DR

If you want to skip this saga, just take a look at `accents_hotkey.sh`. It is shorter and it has some comments.

## Preramble

I switched to Linux back in 2007. I hated XP, so I dual-booted Ubuntu. Then I corrupted my Windows partition and the rest is history.

But even before that, I entered French immersion in middle school. We learned to type French on English keyboards on Windows, which has a handy keyboard shortcut for typing these characters: Hold "Alt" and type the 4 digit character code. For example, to type "è" one would hold "Alt" and type 0,2,3,2 on the number pad. These numbers correspond to the unicode character value. 232 == 0xe8 == è

I realized this sounds awkward, but it actually becomes very fast. I have most of the relevant numbers committed to memory, even many years later. I don't have much occassion to type in French these days, except for on IRC sometimes. In those cases I just omit the accents.

## The problem

All of a sudden, I have a need to type a more formal document in French. It is a cover letter for a remote job out of Montréal, working with my favourite front-end stack Nuxt.js (A framework around Vue.js that enables SSR and lots of other cool stuff). I use Nuxt for the majority of my personal projects, and I would love to be able to work with it full time.

As a challenge to myself and to get myself in a French state-of-mind (?) I decided to write the cover letter in French first. Words are flowing but I keep trying to hit "Alt" and the numberpad to type accented characters. I could just omit them for now, then edit them in later. But that is just not my process, I found it disruptive.

There are (means of typing these characters under Linux)[https://wiki.linuxquestions.org/wiki/Accented_Characters], but they are not ideal for me. I'd really prefer to take advantage of the numbers I have already memorized and keep it as close to the Windows semantics as possible.

## The solution

Being a master procrastinator, the only sane option is to implement these keyboard shorcuts on Linux myself. How long could that possibly take?

## Longer than I thought

I start with the simplest possibility, the custom keyboard shortcuts offered by my desktop environment, Cinnamon. Immediately I hit complications. These shortcuts allow you to run a command when a key combination is pressed. Unfortunately, what I need is slightly different. I need to grab the subsequent keystrokes *while* "Alt" is held down.

The next possibility I investigated was [Autokey](https://github.com/autokey/autokey). I hear it is more powerful. Unfortunately, it was immediately disqualified for being too slow. Advanced functionality is done using Python scripts, which take at least a full second to even begin running. I need the whole process to take less than a second.

## The hacky hybrid solution

Giving up on implementing this cleanly, I decide to get hacky. I will use the OS custom keyboard shortcuts to launch a utility that captures the subsequent keypresses and does the magic.

When it's a hacky solution that needs to be fast, Bash is my go to. It gives the execution speed of C with the development speed of a higher-level language. I decided on "Alt + Numpad_0" to launch my utility, to take advantage of exisiting muscle memory.

The objective now is to capture the subsequent 3 keystrokes, convert them to the corresponding unicode character and simulate typing the character in the active window.

## Everybody knows X11 is insecure

Being an avid reader of [Hacker News](https://news.ycombinator.com), I was under the impression that X11 is totally insecure and any process can grab keystrokes from any window. I was shocked to find that I couldn't easily capture/inject keyboard characters from/to the X11 window of my choosing.

I can send the event to the window of my choosing, but X11 events generated by XSendEvent are ignored by every application I tried. I couldn't even log the keystrokes from the window of my choosing (using `xev`) as they keyboard events were not received. It is possible I was just doing it wrong, but unable to proceed I changed tactics.

`xev` can launch a small window and report all the events in that window. I could launch a small, unobtrusive window and use that to grab the keystrokes. That still leaves the problem of injecting the character at the end, but at least it is progress.

## Putting it all together

Emitting the character to the active window ended up having an easy solution; Copy & paste! 'xclip' lets us store things in the clipboard, and 'xdotool' will let us simulate "Ctrl + V" to paste. Since paste automatically goes to the active window, it is mission accomplished. As an added bonus, by firing the keyup event for the "Alt" key, I don't even have to let go of "Alt" (Alt has its own uses on Linux, such as Alt+F opens the current window's file menu).

You see, on Windows, you hold "Alt" while typing the code. My hack launches the utility with "Alt + 0". This means I should probably let go of "Alt" before typing the code. But if I forget out of habit, it will still work. The UX semantics are identical to those of Windows.
